---
title: "Radiomics Analysis for Clinical Decision Support in Nuclear Medicine"

abstract: Radiomics - the high-throughput computation of quantitative image features extracted from medical imaging modalities- can be used to aid clinical decision support systems in order to build diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive models, which could ultimately improve personalized management based on individual characteristics. Various tools for radiomic features extraction are available, and the field gained a substantial scientific momentum for standardization and validation. Radiomics analysis of molecular imaging is expected to provide more comprehensive description of tissues than that of currently used parameters. We here review the workflow of radiomics, the challenges the field currently faces, and its potential for inclusion in clinical decision support systems to maximize disease characterization, and to improve clinical decision-making. We also present guidelines for standardization and implementation of radiomics in order to facilitate its transition to clinical use.
abstract: This chapter examines the data landscape and general data requirements to develop quantitative toxicity models. Optimal cancer treatment requires maximising the
abstract: Prediction modelling with radiomics is a rapidly developing research topic that requires access to vast amounts of imaging data. Methods that work on decentralized data are urgently needed, because of concerns about patient privacy. Previously published computed tomography medical image sets with gross tumour volume (GTV) outlines for non-small cell lung cancer have been updated with extended follow-up. In a previous study, these were referred to as Lung1 (n = 421) and Lung2 (n = 221). The Lung1 dataset is made publicly accessible via The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA; https://www.cancerimagingarchive.net ). We performed a decentralized multi-centre study to develop a radiomic signature (hereafter “ZS2019”) in one institution and validated the performance in an independent institution, without the need for data exchange and compared this to an analysis where all data was centralized. The performance of ZS2019 for 2-year overall survival validated in distributed radiomics was not statistically different from the centralized validation (AUC 0.61 vs 0.61; p = 0.52). Although slightly different in terms of data and methods, no statistically significant difference in performance was observed between the new signature and previous work (c-index 0.58 vs 0.65; p = 0.37). Our objective was not the development of a new signature with the best performance, but to suggest an approach for distributed radiomics. Therefore, we used a similar method as an earlier study. We foresee that the Lung1 dataset can be further re-used for testing radiomic models and investigating feature reproducibility.
abstract: The liver is a vital organ in vertebrates that can be subject to disease, among others due to exposure to toxic xenobiotic compounds. A group of transcription factors named ligand activated nuclear receptors (LANR) influence and regulate important liver functions, and can be activated by many xenobiotic compounds, which thereby can cause hepatotoxicity. Systematic analysis of the gene pathways regulated by LANR using modern 'omics technologies is important for investigating modes-of-action of hepatotoxicants. So far, these pathways are not publicly available in a format that allows these studies. We used PathVisio to build liver-specific LANR pathways, both for rats and humans. Since many LANR pathways are linked to each other, we also merged them into a meta-pathway. The pathways are in a GPML-format that enables pathway statistics and visualisations, and will be made available to the public through WikiPathways. We demonstrate the performance of these novel pathways in evaluating transcriptomic studies from the Japanese toxicogenomics project database (Open TG-GATEs). We show that the new pathways can be used to accurately analyse and visualize the effects of prototypical hepatotoxicants in important liver processes, and thus to evaluate the possible mode-of-actions of hepatotoxic xenobiotic compounds by assessing which LANRs are possible targets.