---
title: "Radiomics Analysis for Clinical Decision Support in Nuclear Medicine"

abstract: Radiomics - the high-throughput computation of quantitative image features extracted from medical imaging modalities- can be used to aid clinical decision support systems in order to build diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive models, which could ultimately improve personalized management based on individual characteristics. Various tools for radiomic features extraction are available, and the field gained a substantial scientific momentum for standardization and validation. Radiomics analysis of molecular imaging is expected to provide more comprehensive description of tissues than that of currently used parameters. We here review the workflow of radiomics, the challenges the field currently faces, and its potential for inclusion in clinical decision support systems to maximize disease characterization, and to improve clinical decision-making. We also present guidelines for standardization and implementation of radiomics in order to facilitate its transition to clinical use.
abstract: This chapter examines the data landscape and general data requirements to develop quantitative toxicity models. Optimal cancer treatment requires maximising the
abstract: Prediction modelling with radiomics is a rapidly developing research topic that requires access to vast amounts of imaging data. Methods that work on decentralized data are urgently needed, because of concerns about patient privacy. Previously published computed tomography medical image sets with gross tumour volume (GTV) outlines for non-small cell lung cancer have been updated with extended follow-up. In a previous study, these were referred to as Lung1 (n = 421) and Lung2 (n = 221). The Lung1 dataset is made publicly accessible via The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA; https://www.cancerimagingarchive.net ). We performed a decentralized multi-centre study to develop a radiomic signature (hereafter “ZS2019”) in one institution and validated the performance in an independent institution, without the need for data exchange and compared this to an analysis where all data was centralized. The performance of ZS2019 for 2-year overall survival validated in distributed radiomics was not statistically different from the centralized validation (AUC 0.61 vs 0.61; p = 0.52). Although slightly different in terms of data and methods, no statistically significant difference in performance was observed between the new signature and previous work (c-index 0.58 vs 0.65; p = 0.37). Our objective was not the development of a new signature with the best performance, but to suggest an approach for distributed radiomics. Therefore, we used a similar method as an earlier study. We foresee that the Lung1 dataset can be further re-used for testing radiomic models and investigating feature reproducibility.
abstract: The liver is a vital organ in vertebrates that can be subject to disease, among others due to exposure to toxic xenobiotic compounds. A group of transcription factors named ligand activated nuclear receptors (LANR) influence and regulate important liver functions, and can be activated by many xenobiotic compounds, which thereby can cause hepatotoxicity. Systematic analysis of the gene pathways regulated by LANR using modern 'omics technologies is important for investigating modes-of-action of hepatotoxicants. So far, these pathways are not publicly available in a format that allows these studies. We used PathVisio to build liver-specific LANR pathways, both for rats and humans. Since many LANR pathways are linked to each other, we also merged them into a meta-pathway. The pathways are in a GPML-format that enables pathway statistics and visualisations, and will be made available to the public through WikiPathways. We demonstrate the performance of these novel pathways in evaluating transcriptomic studies from the Japanese toxicogenomics project database (Open TG-GATEs). We show that the new pathways can be used to accurately analyse and visualize the effects of prototypical hepatotoxicants in important liver processes, and thus to evaluate the possible mode-of-actions of hepatotoxic xenobiotic compounds by assessing which LANRs are possible targets.
abstract: We define breathomics as the metabolomics study of exhaled air. It is a strongly emerging metabolomics research field that mainly focuses on health-related volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Since the amount of these compounds varies with health status, breathomics holds great promise to deliver non-invasive diagnostic tools. Thus, the main aim of breathomics is to find patterns of VOCs related to abnormal (for instance inflammatory) metabolic processes occurring in the human body. Recently, analytical methods for measuring VOCs in exhaled air with high resolution and high throughput have been extensively developed. Yet, the application of machine learning methods for fingerprinting VOC profiles in the breathomics is still in its infancy. Therefore, in this paper, we describe the current state of the art in data pre-processing and multivariate analysis of breathomics data. We start with the detailed pre-processing pipelines for breathomics data obtained from gas-chromatography mass spectrometry and an ion-mobility spectrometer coupled to multi-capillary columns. The outcome of data pre-processing is a matrix containing the relative abundances of a set of VOCs for a group of patients under different conditions (e.g. disease stage, treatment). Independently of the utilized analytical method, the most important question, 'which VOCs are discriminatory?', remains the same. Answers can be given by several modern machine learning techniques (multivariate statistics) and, therefore, are the focus of this paper. We demonstrate the advantages as well the drawbacks of such techniques. We aim to help the community to understand how to profit from a particular method. In parallel, we hope to make the community aware of the existing data fusion methods, as yet unresearched in breathomics.
abstract: Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) is a nosocomial infection occurring in the intensive care unit (ICU). The diagnostic standard is based on clinical criteria and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Exhaled breath analysis is a promising non-invasive method for rapid diagnosis of diseases and contains volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that can differentiate diseased from healthy individuals. The aim of this study was to determine whether analysis of VOCs in exhaled breath can be used as a non-invasive monitoring tool for VAP. One hundred critically ill patients with clinical suspicion of VAP underwent BAL. Before BAL, exhaled air samples were collected and analysed by gas chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GC-tof-MS). The clinical suspicion of VAP was confirmed by BAL diagnostic criteria in 32 patients [VAP(+)] and rejected in 68 patients [VAP(-)]. Multivariate statistical comparison of VOC profiles between VAP(+) and VAP(-) revealed a subset of 12 VOCs that correctly discriminated between those two patient groups with a sensitivity and specificity of 75.8\% ± 13.5\% and 73.0\% ± 11.8\%, respectively. These results suggest that detection of VAP in ICU patients is possible by examining exhaled breath, enabling a simple, safe and non-invasive approach that could diminish diagnostic burden of VAP.
abstract: As in other disciplines of 'omics' research, reproducibility is a major problem in exhaled breath research. Many studies report discriminatory volatiles in the same disease, yet the similarity between lists of identified compounds is low. This can occur due to many factors including the lack of internal and, in particular, external validation. In an ideal situation, an external validation-sampled at, for example, a different location-is always included to ensure generalization of the observed findings to a general population. In this study, we hypothesized that sarcoidosis patients and healthy controls could be discriminated based on a group of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in exhaled breath and that these discriminating VOCs could be validated in an external population. The first dataset consisted of 87 sarcoidosis patients and 27 healthy controls, whereas the validation dataset consisted of 25 patients and 29 controls. Using the first dataset, nine VOCs were found that could predict sarcoidosis with 79.4\% accuracy. Different types of internal and external validation were tested to assess the validity of the nine VOCs. Of the internal validations, randomly setting aside part of the data achieved the most accurate predictions while external validation was only possible by building a new prediction model that yielded a promising yet not entirely convincing accuracy of 74\% due to the indirect approach. In conclusion, the initial results of this study are very promising but, as the results of our validation set already indicated, may not be reproducible in other studies. In order to achieve a reliable diagnostic breath fingerprint for sarcoidosis, we encourage other scientists to validate the presented findings. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00741572 \& NCT02361281.
abstract: Genotoxic carcinogens significantly damage cells and tissues by targeting macromolecules such as proteins and DNA, but their mechanisms of action and effects on human health are diverse. Consequently, determining the amount of exposure to a carcinogen and its cellular effects is essential, yet difficult. The aim of this manuscript was to investigate the potential of detecting alterations in volatile organic compounds (VOCs) profiles in the in vitro headspace of pulmonary cells after exposure to the genotoxic carcinogens cisplatin and benzo[a]pyrene using two different sampling set-ups. A prototype set-up was used for the cisplatin exposure, whereas a modified set-up was utilized for the benzo[a]pyrene exposure. Both carcinogens were added to the cell medium for 24 h. The headspace in the culture flask was sampled to measure the VOC content using gas chromatography-time-of-flight-mass spectrometry. Eight cisplatin-specific VOCs and six benzo[a]pyrene-specific VOCs were discriminatory between treated and non-treated cells. Since the in vivo biological effects of both genotoxic compounds are well-defined, the origin of the identified VOCs could potentially be traced back to common cellular processes including cell cycle pathways, DNA damage and repair. These results indicate that exposing lung cells to genotoxins alters headspace VOC profiles, suggesting that it might be possible to monitor VOC changes in vivo to study drug efficacy or exposure to different pollutants. In conclusion, this study emphasizes the innovative potential of in vitro VOCs experiments to determine their in vivo applicability and discover their endogenous origin.
abstract: The identification of specific volatile organic compounds (VOCs) produced by microorganisms may assist in developing a fast and accurate methodology for the determination of pulmonary bacterial infections in exhaled air. As a first step, pulmonary bacteria were cultured and their headspace analyzed for the total amount of excreted VOCs to select those compounds which are exclusively associated with specific microorganisms. Development of a rapid, noninvasive methodology for identification of bacterial species may improve diagnostics and antibiotic therapy, ultimately leading to controlling the antibiotic resistance problem. Two hundred bacterial headspace samples from four different microorganisms (Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella pneumoniae) were analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry to detect a wide array of VOCs. Statistical analysis of these volatiles enabled the characterization of specific VOC profiles indicative for each microorganism. Differences in VOC abundance between the bacterial types were determined using ANalysis of VAriance-principal component analysis (ANOVA-PCA). These differences were visualized with PCA. Cross validation was applied to validate the results. We identified a large number of different compounds in the various headspaces, thus demonstrating a highly significant difference in VOC occurrence of bacterial cultures compared to the medium and between the cultures themselves. Additionally, a separation between a methicillin-resistant and a methicillin-sensitive isolate of S. aureus could be made due to significant differences between compounds. ANOVA-PCA analysis showed that 25 VOCs were differently profiled across the various microorganisms, whereas a PCA score plot enabled the visualization of these clear differences between the bacterial types. We demonstrated that identification of the studied microorganisms, including an antibiotic susceptible and resistant S. aureus substrain, is possible based on a selected number of compounds measured in the headspace of these cultures. These in vitro results may translate into a breath analysis approach that has the potential to be used as a diagnostic tool in medical microbiology.
abstract: Performing image feature extraction in radiation oncology is often dependent on the organ and tumor delineations provided by clinical staff. These delineation names are free text DICOM metadata fields resulting in undefined information, which requires effort to use in large-scale image feature extraction efforts. In this work we present a scale-able solution to overcome these naming convention challenges with a REST service using Semantic Web technology to convert this information to linked data. As a proof of concept an open source software is used to compute radiation oncology image features. The results of this work can be found in a public Bitbucket repository.